Is Alpaca Fiber Sustainable?

In short, yes. Centuries ago, tribes of the Andean highlands domesticated the vicuña, the alpaca’s long-last ancestor. As herds of alpaca roamed the land, the tribes evolved alongside the gentle animals, shearing them annually before releasing them back into their natural habitat where they roamed freely, and the fiber was used to make all manner of goods. In many ways, much of that process remains unchanged.

Unlike synthetic fibers, alpaca fiber is still harvested without the use of chemicals or pesticides. From shearing to wearing, the fabric can be created by hand—it only needs to be sorted, spun into yarn, dyed (if you need a pop of color), and knit or woven into a garment. Unlike cashmere or wool, alpaca doesn’t contain a waxy substance known as lanolin, so it doesn’t need to be treated to remove the lanolin before it’s spun into yarn. Once it turns into, say, your favorite shirt, it rarely needs to be washed because again, the fiber’s antimicrobial and moisture-wicking properties reduce the need for endless wash/dry cycles. And after your alpaca threads reach the end of their life cycle, the natural fibers that enter the environment break down in one to five years. While it may offer benefits similar to that of other natural fibers, we’d wager that it’s a little better than the rest.

Are Alpacas Good For The Environment?

Okay, so alpaca fiber is surprisingly sustainable, but what about the animal itself? As you may have guessed, the alpaca has a healthy relationship with the environment, though the reasoning might surprise you. Compared to the two other natural fibers that are most often associated with alpaca (cashmere and merino wool), the alpaca has evolved in many ways that suit its habitat.

For starters, its feet are actually paws that barely leave a footprint, while goats and sheep have sharp hooves that damage soil and further desertification. Alpacas also nibble on the tops of grasses and other plants which promotes regenerative agriculture—goats and sheep, on the other hand, rip vegetation out by the root, disturbing the landscape. They require far less food and water than goats and sheep, yet they produce more fiber with each shear—it takes four goats to make one cashmere sweater, while one alpaca shearing yields four to five sweaters. And even when the time comes to do their duty, alpacas have a communal dung pile that’s located far away from the grass they eat and the water they drink. Their waste is also used as a fertilizer.

How Does Alpaca Wool Impact the Environment?

The farming of alpacas and the harvesting of the wool that these animals produce has a negligible environmental impact. Even though this type of wool has become increasingly popular in recent decades, it still isn't produced in high enough quantities to impact the environment one way or the other, and even if production of this fiber became much more widespread, it's unlikely that it would be environmentally harmful.

In many South American countries, this wool is harvested and prepared in traditional methods that are designed to be in harmony with the environment. Even when alpacas are bred in other countries, alpaca breeders are generally enthusiastic about the animals that they raise, and they do not subject them to factory farming conditions.
It is, of course, possible for unethical alpaca breeders to harm their animals or use environmentally degrading methods of production, but the chances of this occurring are incredibly low. Alpaca wool is an entirely biodegradable fabric, which means that it does not pollute the hydrosphere or biosphere.
The only way that the production of wool from alpaca fibers could be environmentally degrading is if harmful dyes or bleaching substances were used to prepare alpaca yarn. Then again, this fabric is still produced in such low quantities that even such practices would likely have a negligible environmental impact.