Characteristics of aramid fibers
Aramids fibers show resistance to many solvents and salt, but can be weakened by strong acids. While they are difficult to dye and sensitive to UV light, they are hard to burn, and instead of melting, they decompose. 

Aramid products are available as filament yarn, staple fiber or pulp. They retain much of their strength at high temperatures and resist permanent deformation or 'creep' under prolonged stress. Their toughness surpasses steel, glass fiber and nylon, and they show high durability even under extreme tension and bending, making them incredibly versatile.

Applications where aramids are used
Thanks to their high strength, heat resistance and lightweight properties, aramid fibers have made a major impact across a wide range of industries.

Production process of the para-aramid Twaron®
Around the world, all our global site operations are underpinned by a rigorous system that ensures compliance with relevant laws and regulations. As such, our operations meet high quality, health and environmental standards. Our materials also meet the highest regulatory standards. 

Dedicated specialists in our manufacturing departments continually monitor the production of Twaron®, which is made from monomers in several stages: polymerization, continuous filament yarn spinning and converting.

Step 1: Polymerization 

The process begins with the combination of monomers to form a sturdy, finely-grained para-aramid polymer. This material has the typical heat resistance and chemical properties of para-aramid.

Step 2: Continuous filament yarn spinning 

Next, the polymer is dissolved in sulfuric acid to create a liquid crystalline solution. The solution is then spun into fine, naturally yellow or dye-infused continuous filament yarns by a wet-spinning process. These fibers are completely crystalline, with molecular chains running parallel to the filament axis, providing the yarns with their unique properties.

Step 3: Converting 

In the final stage, the continuous filament yarns are crimped to produce staple fiber, treated with a finishing agent, and then cut to the desired length to create short-cut fibers. The untwisted continuous filament yarns can now also be twisted to enhance their fit-for-use characteristics.

Step 4: Converting to pulp 

Filament yarns are chopped and mixed with water to form a fibrous substance called wet pulp. This wet pulp can be sold directly or dried to create and sell as dry pulp.

