How is Camel Wool Fabric
Made?
1. Shearing of Bactrian Camel Bactrian breeders simply wait for all of the hair on one of their animals to fall off. If they do shear their camels, they always leave
the area over the hump covered with hair.
2. Washing
Once all of the hair has fallen off or been shorn off a
Bactrian, it is cleaned to remove impurities.
3. Carding Carding is the process of separating hair fibers into
strands.
4. Spinning
After it has been carded, the wool is ready to
be spun into yarn.
5. Finishing The spun yarn is then washed one more time to prepare it to be
worked into textiles.
Every year, the Bactrian camel starts to grow a thick coat of hair toward the end of the summer. By the end of October, this coat is close to its full thickness, but it will become even more robust by midwinter.
The Bactrian camel is protected from the winter chill by this coat. It receives this attribute from one of its genetic parents, a camel species known as Camelus bactranus , which is native to Siberia and other cold parts of Asia. Many centuries ago, Camelus bactranus was bred with Camelus dromedarius , which is known for its long and lustrous hair. The resulting Bactrian camel has attributes of both of its parents, and it is capable of growing its beautiful and soft hair in even the coldest Asian climates.
Once the frost begins to thaw in the spring, the Bactrian camel prepares to shed its coat. Breeders of this type of camel have generational experience in predicting exactly when chunks of hair will start to fall off the camels in their caravans.

What Is Camel Wool?

Camel wool is a type of fabric derived from the coats of camels. This type of fabric is more commonly known as camel hair, and it is usually derived from a camel subspecies known as the Bactrian camel .
These types of camels are common in the Mongol Steppes region, and they can be found across a wide area stretching from Turkey to China and Siberia. Unlike most camels, which are short-haired, Bactrian camels are known for their long, lustrous hair and large twin humps.

The camel hair derived from the Bactrian camel consists of two separate portions: The guard hair and the undercoat. The guard hair is hard and coarse, and it doesn't make very good fabric unless it is mixed with another substance like sheep wool. This part of a Bactrian camel's coat protects it from the brutal winters on the Steppes, and in the middle of winter, it gives Bactrian camels a thick and fuzzy appearance.

The undercoat is quite soft, and it is used by Bactrian camels much in the same way that fiberglass insulation is used between the inner and outer walls of houses. While the guard coat may be used to make certain types of textiles, the undercoat is the portion of the Bactrian camel's hair that is most commonly used to make apparel.
The use of camel hair as a textile fabric is a practice that's most commonly associated with the waning days of the British Empire, but the use of this type of hair to make garments has experienced a recent renaissance among the sustainably-minded or "conscious" consumer population. While most types of wool can only be derived by shearing hairs off animals, Bactrian camels naturally shed their winter coats every spring, which means that harvesting this type of hair is usually a sustainable and cruelty-free enterprise.
Camel wool is generally separated into three grades: High-grade fibers are usually derived from the undercoat, and only the best undercoat fibers can be considered to be truly high-grade. It is high-grade camel wool fibers that are most commonly used to make consumer textiles.
Undercoat fibers that aren't considered to be high-grade are usually referred to as medium-grade, and while these fibers may also be used to make apparel, the garments that are made with medium-grade fibers are rougher to the touch. Lastly, low-grade camel hair fibers are usually derived from the guard coat, and these rough and inflexible fibers are only suited for carpets and similarly rigid textiles.
When viewed under a microscope, camel hair fibers look very similar to sheep wool fibers, but their scales are less pronounced. Like other types of wool fibers, camel hairs have hollow, air-filled matrices that make them excellent insulators.
