What is cashmere fabric?

Cashmere is a type of wool that is made from the hair of a certain type of goat native to the Gobi Desert and Central Asia. Long considered to be one of the softest and most luxurious types of wool in existence, cashmere is highly prized as a material for sweaters, scarves, and other light cold-weather gear.
While cashmere is not as insulative as other types of wool, it is much softer and finer, which makes it possible to weave cashmere into highly dense but thin fabric. This type of wool will not insulate you as well as traditional sheep wool, but it is soft enough to wear directly next to the skin, which is advantageous for applications like underwear and undershirts.

There are some concerns about the treatment of cashmere goats. It is, however, certainly possible to produce cashmere wool sustainably and ethically, and here at Sewport, we’ve partnered with a variety of ethical cashmere brands. We’ll cover everything you need to know about cashmere in this guide.

Cashmere fabric today

These days, cashmere wool is mainly produced in China, but there is still a thriving cottage cashmere economy within the Central Asian nations. Cashmere production continues to increase with world population and the reduction of poverty, and it’s likely that China will remain the main exporter of cashmere for the foreseeable future. While there are many unethical textile manufacturers in China, there are also lots of ethical Chinese cashmere producers.
While animal fibers like wool have gone out of fashion to a degree due to animal rights concerns, there is no suitable synthetic alternative to cashmere. For decades, textile manufacturers expected that people would gradually start wearing only synthetic fabrics, but instead, the opposite has happened. The world economy is gradually moving toward fair trade and sustainable textile manufacturing processes.
Combined with the latest standards in organic, cruelty-free manufacturing processes, cashmere is a fabric that will continue to have a lasting impact on the evolution of 21st-century textile commerce. It’s a simple fact that nothing compares to the sleek lustrousness of finely-woven cashmere wool, and people will continue to pay for cashmere products as long as they are on the market.

How Is Cashmere Fabric Made?
1. Shearing
Fully-coated goats are sheared to obtain the fur.
2. Cleaning Raw wool is picked through with any dirt or
impurities being removed.
3. Combing Individual wool fibers are combed into straight lines,
and they are carded into light groups of fibers.
4. Spinning Carded fibers are fed into a spinning machine
which twists the wool fibers to form yarn.
Cleaning, dyeing, etc. The yarn is cleaned again and, if dye is desired, it may
be applied at this point.
6. Weaving The finished cashmere yarn is woven into a
textile product.
7. Final treatments Before garments leave the facility, they may be treated with flame retardants or other final
treatments.
8. Packaging and fulfillment The final products are packaged, branded, and made
ready for sale.
Cashmere fabric production is broken down into several different processes. Commercial cashmere production is very different than traditional, cottage-industry-style production. For thousands of years, nomadic herding peoples have shorn the hair from their goats, combed it, and spun it into fine yarn. Large-scale cashmere production facilities follow roughly the same processes, but at a much larger scale.

1. Shearing

First, the goats are allowed to grow full coats of hair. The shearing process can be accomplished in a variety of ways, and it’s certainly possible to shear cashmere goats without harming them.
2. Cleaning

Next, the raw wool is picked through, and any dirt or impurities are removed.
3. Combing

The individual wool fibers are combed into straight lines, and they are carded into light groups of fibers.

4. Spinning

The carded fibers are fed into a spinning machine, which twists the wool fibers to form yarn. Depending on the textile products being produced, thinner or thicker yarn may be desired.
5. Cleaning, dyeing, etc.

The yarn is cleaned again, and if dye is desired, it may be applied at this point. In some cases, manufacturers prefer to garment-dye their cashmere items.
6. Weaving

The finished cashmere yarn is woven into a textile product. Examples of popular cashmere products include scarves, vests, and sweaters.

7. Final treatments

Before the garments leave the facility, they may be treated with flame-retardants or other final treatments. Keep in mind that wool is naturally flame-resistant.
8. Packaging and fulfillment

The final products are packaged, branded, and made ready for sale.