What is cupro fabric?

Every garment made with natural fiber reaches the end of its lifetime eventually. In most cases, cotton garments are discarded after use, but your old t-shirts can also be recycled to make a textile sometimes referred to as “cupro” or “cupra” on Chinese textile websites.
Cupro fabric is recycled, which appeals to our environmentally-minded sensibilities. At the same time, however, cuprammonium rayon production involves large quantities of copper, ammonia, and caustic soda, all three of which can be toxic when they aren’t disposed of properly. What’s more, cupro fibers must be bathed in a variety of toxic chemicals before they harden, which exposes the environment to further harm.

While cupro isn’t strictly synthetic, it’s hardly a natural fiber either. After being exposed to ammonia, copper, and caustic soda, the chemical structure of the cellulose in cotton or any other plant product changes dramatically, which makes cupro yet another example of a Chinese rayon derivative marketed as a natural or recycled fiber.
Examples of similar fibers include lyocell and tencel, both of which are championed extensively by government-controlled Chinese textile manufacturers. In the end, rayon-type fabrics like cupro belong in a new category of textiles that, while recycled, may have the same negative impact on the environment as fully synthetic fibers.Properties of cupro

Cupro is generally prized for these qualities:
Fineness
Elasticity
Sheerness
Easy mixture with other fabrics

While it isn’t the most durable rayon derivative, cuprammonium rayon is one of the synthetic fabrics that most closely resembles silk, so it’s often used to replace garments traditionally made with this natural fiber. Cupro is nothing like real silk, however, and it’s important to touch on some of the drawbacks of this fabric to be fully fair:
Ignites easily at temperatures above 180 degrees
Chars when ignited
Leaves behind a residue containing significant concentrations of copper
Cuprammonium rayon cannot be washed in hot water, and unlike natural fibers like wool, cuprammonium doesn’t burn cleanly.

How Is Cupro Fabric Made?
1. Exposing Cuprammonium rayon is made by exposing the cellulose of a plant product to a mixture of ammonium and
copper.
2. Combining These two elements combine with the cellulose to
make a new substance.
3. Dropping The mixture is dropped into caustic soda and
extruded through a spinneret.
4. Reconstructing The extruded strings are immersed into a series of hardening baths that reconstruct the cellulose and
remove the ammonia, copper, and caustic soda.

Cuprammonium rayon is made by exposing the cellulose of a plant product, such as cotton clothing, to a mixture of ammonium and copper. These two elements combine with the cellulose to make a new substance, and then the mixture is dropped into caustic soda and extruded through a spinneret.
The extruded strings are then immersed in a series of hardening baths that reconstruct the cellulose and remove the ammonia, copper, and caustic soda. In some cases, these baths may be reused multiple times, but no matter what, cuprammonium rayon baths must be disposed of at some time in some place.

