What Is Elastane Fabric?

Elastane is the generic term used to describe branded textiles such as Lycra. This type of fabric is also called spandex, and its primary attribute is its incredible elasticity. While Lycra, spandex, and elastane are all the same material, regional variants of the term "elastane" are most commonly used to refer to this type of fabric in continental Europe.
This textile is composed of a long chain polymer known as polyurethane, and it is known in technical circles as a polyether-polyurea copolymer. Elastane is an entirely synthetic fabric; no organic materials are used to make this substance, and it does not exist anywhere in nature.

While elastane was invented in the late 1950s, the story of this material truly begins in 1937 in Nazi Germany. Polyurethane was originally invented by Otto Bayer and his associates at the IG Farben plant at Leverkusen, and this substance was almost immediately made into a variety of plastics. The primary purpose of polyurethane was as a replacement for rubber, which was only available from certain types of trees and, therefore, was subject to unexpected price fluctuations and was sometimes hard to obtain.

The Nazis used polyurethane for coatings on fighter planes, and it was also made into forms of specialty plastics called elastomers. Foam made from polyurethane remains a highly popular shock and heat insulator to this day, and this type of plastic is in wide use in a variety of other applications as well.
At the time, IG Farben didn't intend to use polyurethane for apparel, but the DuPont Corporation essentially inherited the will of this legendary German company after World War II, and DuPont's pioneering research into the properties of polyurethane eventually led to the recognition that it could be used to make extraordinarily elastic fabrics.
Elastane's ability to withstand high temperatures was immediately noted by DuPont, and this substance's stretchiness made it an excellent addition to the various types of polyester that the corporation was currently developing. DuPont branded their elastane under the name "Lycra," and they immediately began putting it to use in apparel and industrial applications.
This fabric is formed from a variety of different fully synthetic components, and it isn't considered to have a significantly negative environmental impact. However, a variety of toxic chemicals are used in the production of elastane fabric, and if these chemicals are not disposed of properly, they could damage the environment. In addition, garments made with elastane fabric are not biodegradable.

How is Elastane Fabric Made?
1. Production of a Prepolymer This step is accomplished by mixing macroglycol with a
diisocyanate monomer within a special type of reaction vessel.
2. Chain Extension
When the dry spinning method is used, this prepolymer is
then reacted with diamine acid.
3. Diluting Next, this solution is diluted with a solvent to make it thinner and easier to handle, and it is then placed inside a fiber
production cell.
4. Extrusion This cell spins to produce fibers and cure the elastane
material. Within this cell, the solution is pushed
through a spinneret.
5. Heating These fibers are heated within a nitrogen and solvent gas
solution, to form the liquid polymer into solid strands.
6. Twisting The strands are then bundled together as they exit the
cylindrical spinning cell with a compressed air device
that twists them.
7. Finishing Next, magnesium stearate or another polymer is used to treat the elastane material as a finishing agent, which prevents the
fibers from adhering to each other.
8. Weaving
Lastly, these fibers are transferred to a spool, and they are
then ready to be dyed or woven into fibers.

Four different methods can be used to produce this elastic fabric: Reaction spinning, solution wet spinning, melt extrusion, and solution dry spinning. Most of these production processes have been discarded as inefficient or wasteful, and solution dry spinning is now used to produce approximately 95 percent of the world's spandex supply.
The solution dry spinning process begins with the production of a prepolymer, which serves as the basis of elastane fabric. This step is accomplished by mixing macroglycol with a diisocyanate monomer within a special type of reaction vessel. When the right conditions are applied, these two chemicals interact with each other to form a prepolymer. The volume ratio between these two substances is critical, and in most cases, a glycol to diisocyanate ratio of 1:2 is used.
When the dry spinning method is used, this prepolymer is then reacted with diamine acid in a process known as chain extension reaction. Next, this solution is diluted with a solvent to make it thinner and easier to handle, and it is then placed inside a fiber production cell.

This cell spins to produce fibers and cure the elastane material. Within this cell, the solution is pushed through a spinneret, which is a device that looks like a showerhead with lots of tiny holes. These holes form the solution into fibers, and these fibers are then heated within a nitrogen and solvent gas solution, which causes a chemical reaction that forms the liquid polymer into solid strands.
The strands are then bundled together as they exit the cylindrical spinning cell with a compressed air device that twists them. These twisted fibers can be made in a variety of thickness options, and every elastane fiber in apparel or other applications is actually made from many tiny strands that have undergone this twisting process.
Next, magnesium stearate or another polymer is used to treat the elastane material as a finishing agent, which prevents the fibers from adhering to each other. Lastly, these fibers are transferred to a spool, and they are then ready to be dyed or woven into fibers.

