specialty hair fibre

specialty hair fibre, any of the textile fibres obtained from certain animals of the goat and camel families, rarer than the more commonly used fibres and valued for such desirable properties as fine diameter, natural lustre, and ability to impart pleasing hand (characteristics perceived by handling) to fabrics. Specialty hair fibres obtained from the goat family include mohair (q.v.), from the Angora goat, and cashmere (q.v.), sometimes referred to as cashmere wool, from the Kashmir goat. Common goats yield the less-valuable goat hair that is used mainly in low-cost felts and carpets manufactured for the automobile industry. Fibres obtained from animals of the camel family include camel hair (q.v.), mainly from the Bactrian camel, and guanaco, llama, alpaca, and vicuña (q.q.v.) fibres, all from members of the genus Lama.

Specialty hair fibres are gathered by hunting or domesticating the animals for their pelts or by periodic collecting of fleece from live animals. Most of the fibres are low in the crimp (waviness) and felting (tendency to mat together) properties associated with the sheep fibre normally called wool (q.v.). In the United States, however, the Wool Products Labeling Act (1939) allows the designation of such fibres as “wool” in fibre-content labels.

Like wool and the finer, shorter fur fibres, hair fibres grow from the epidermis of the animal, forming the characteristic coat, and are composed chiefly of the protein substance keratin; their chemical properties are similar to those of wool. The animal is usually covered with two types of fibre. An outer coat of shiny, stiff guard hairs affords protection from the elements. The undercoat, or down, composed of short, fine, soft fibre, provides insulation against heat and cold. Short, coarse, brittle hairs, called kemp, may be intermingled with both types of fibre. Separation of the downy fibre from other hair may be achieved by combing or by a blowing process that causes the heavier fibre to fall away. Such operations may be repeated several times to minimize coarse-fibre content.

Long fibres with fine diameter and light colour are usually the most desirable and expensive. An exception is vicuña, valued for its fairly dark cinnamon-brown colour. Specialty hair fibres, costly because of their rarity and the processing they require, may be used alone in luxury fabrics for fine garments. They may also be blended with wool or other fibres to enhance appearance or texture, imparting softness or special effects. The coarse guard hairs are frequently blended with wool to impart lustre.