What Is Jute Fabric?

Jute fabric is a type of textile fiber made from the jute plant. While there are a few different botanical varieties of jute, one of the main species used to make jute fabric is Corchorus olitorius (white jute). However, another species of jute, called Corchorus capsularis (tossa jute) is considered to be superior even though it is harder to cultivate.
Cotton takes the title of most-produced plant-based fiber, but jute is a close second. While jute isn’t very popular in the Western world, it is one of the primary textile fibers of India and neighboring countries. Jute plants grow to be over 10 feet high, and the fibers derived from these plants are harvested in a single long string. Therefore, jute fibers are among the longest natural textile fibers in the world.

Jute grows in similar conditions to rice, and this plant is best suited to warm areas that have annual monsoon seasons. This crop cannot grow in hard water, and ambient humidity level of approximately 80% are necessary for jute production.
History of Jute

Jute has been grown for textile purposes on the Indian subcontinent for at least 5,000 years. The earliest evidence for the production of this plant fiber dates to approximately 3000 BC, but it’s entirely possible that the Indus valley civilization or preceding societies also cultivated jute for fiber purposes before this date.
Even though cotton production was also popular in India, jute played a more central role in the development of Indian society for the millennia preceding the effects of European colonialism. With the advent of British involvement in India, jute became a cash crop that helped fuel British colonial efforts.

While jute had also been grown in Scotland for several centuries, jute production in Bengal and other parts of India quickly overtook Scottish production. Due to the immense profits being made by jute barons in India, many Scottish jute producers emigrated to this British colony to partake in the jute boom.
Jute production remained a significant sector of the economy of the British Empire until the late 19th century, and after Indian independence, jute remained a major export of this region. With the advent of synthetic fibers, however, jute production slackened in the latter half of the 20th century, and it wasn’t until the early 21st century that production of this plant fiber again became a major economic factor in Bengal, Bangladesh, and other areas of the Indian subcontinent.
Attributes of Jute

Jute is a relatively rough fiber, which means that it isn’t well-suited for apparel applications unless it goes through an extensive production process. Instead, jute’s roughness and durability make it ideal for industrial applications. Most types of jute fabric are loose with woven networks of thick yarn.
While jute absorbs water readily, it also dries quickly, and it is highly resistant to abrasion and stains. Being plant-based, however, jute biodegrades relatively quickly, and it isn’t known for its long-term durability in outdoor applications.
Most types of jute fiber are light brown, but some off-white varieties also exist. Generally speaking, white forms of jute are considered to be inferior to brown forms, but white jute may be more useful for apparel applications.
Since it is thick and pliable, jute fiber is generally easy to work with, and since this fiber is long and shiny in its unprocessed state, manufacturing jute yarn is relatively easy. Jute is highly breathable, but it doesn’t naturally retain much heat, which makes it an ideal apparel material for hot and humid climates.

How Is Jute Fabric Made?
1. Harvesting
Mature jute stalks are harvested by hand.
2. Defoliating
They are then defoliated.
3. Retting A process called retting is used to remove the non- fibrous material from the stem and skin of the jute
stalk.
4. Separating and Combing After the jute stalk has been retted, it is possible to
separate the long, silky fibers and comb them into
long strings.
5. Spinning
These combed fibers can then be spun into yarn.
6. Finishing The fibers may be subjected to a variety of chemical processes to dye it, provide it with
water resistance, or make it fire-resistant.
拼
7. Weaving The finished reels of jute fiber are shipped out to textile production facilities to be woven into apparel
or industrial textiles.

The production of jute fabric has remained largely the same for centuries. In most cases, mature jute stalks are harvested by hand, and they are then defoliated. Jute fibers can be derived from both the inner stem and the outer skin of the stalk.
A process called retting is used to remove the non-fibrous material from the stem and skin of the jute stalk. Retting softens the stalks and makes it possible to separate the fibrous material from the unusable material by hand.
After the jute stalk has been retted, it is possible to separate the long, silky fibers and comb them into long strings. These combed fibers can then be spun into yarn. While it’s technically possible to make jute yarn with automated machines, most jute-producing communities still rely on analog spinning wheels for this process.
Once jute fiber has been spun into yarn, it may be subjected to a variety of chemical processes to dye it, provide it with water resistance, or make it fire-resistant. Then, the finished reels of jute fiber are shipped out to textile production facilities to be woven into apparel or industrial textiles.
In the case of jute apparel, a variety of softening techniques are used to make the finished apparel products more comfortable. Some manufacturers may agitate the jute yarn to reduce its roughness, or chemical techniques may be used to achieve the same effect. Jute fiber used for industrial purposes can generally be left in its original condition without using any softening techniques.

