What is leather fabric?

Leather is a natural fabric made using tanned animal skin. Believed to be the first fabric crafted with human hands, leather has evolved significantly over the millennia. Leather remains, however, one of the most desirable textile products due to its durability, water-resistance, insulative properties, and luxurious softness. Available in many different styles, grades, and colors, leather is one of the most diversified natural textiles.
History of leather

The exact historical origins of leather making are unknown. Human beings have clothed themselves in animal skins for at least 400,000 years, but these fur-covered and untreated skins bore little resemblance to today’s carefully cleaned and tanned leather textiles.

It appears that the earliest treated leather products emerged around 5000 BC, and artisans produced these primitive forms of leather by drying skins in the sun, softening them using animal fat, and salting and smoking them for preservation. It wasn’t until around 400 BC that the Egyptians determined how to tan leather with tannins derived from vegetables. Tannins are natural astringent compounds that prevent the disintegration of collagen in animal hides.

With the collapse of the Roman Empire, which had served as the ancient world’s leather epicenter, the art of leather making was preserved in Arabia. By the Late Middle Ages, Arab leather workers had become so renowned for their craft that to this day, certain types of leather remain named after Arab leather capitals such as Morocco and Cordoba, Spain (which was under Arab rule for multiple centuries).
As the Renaissance dawned, Europe regained its status as a center of industry and commerce, and throughout the 17th and 18th century, Italy established itself as an epicenter of leathercraft. In addition to gaining popularity as an apparel textile, leather also became an in-demand material for light armor during the war-torn Renaissance period.
During the Enlightenment period, use of leather in apparel and accessories maintained steady popularity, and this textile also became a common book binding material. The Industrial Revolution saw the dawn of automated leather-making machines, and by the end of the 19th century, leather manufacturers developed the first mineral tanning methods using chromium, which has since become the primary tanning substance in use today.

Leather today

Leather remains a remarkably popular textile around the world. Especially in populous, developing nations like India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh, leather is one of the primary materials for shoes, bags, and other everyday items. Modern leather varies widely in grade, however, and leather textiles produced in India, China, and elsewhere are not commonly held in high regard.
Instead, today’s high-quality leather epicenter is Italy, which has remained the world’s premier maker of fine leather for more than 500 years. People from every nation go out of their way to buy genuine Italian leather goods, and the most recognizable designer brands, including Gucci and Coach, almost exclusively use Italian-made leather.
The modern era has seen the dawn of some of the worst-quality leather, including recycled or “bonded” leather goods made in third-world countries, and also the finest leather goods made in history, including genuine Italian top-grain leather. While leather has lost some degree of popularity in recent decades due to animal rights concerns, it remains common knowledge that there is simply no substitute for artisan-crafted leather goods.

How is Leather Fabric Made?
1. Tanning preparation Firstly, flesh and film is removed from the animal hide before being subjected to stretching and a dehydration
process.
2. Tanning Next, hides are soaked in lime and water to loosen hair and other undesired tissue, which are then removed by
machine. The hides are then washed and bated.
3. Post-tanning Then, hides are dried and dyed before oils and greases are applied to its surface to improve its texture and
water-resistance.
4. Finishing Finally, the nearly-finished leather is dried, raised and stretched before being coated one last time to make it
resistant to abrasion and the elements.

Leather fabric is composed of specially treated animal skins. The leather-making process has three major stages: tanning preparation, tanning, and post-tanning processing.

Tanning preparation

Before it’s possible to tan leather, a removed animal hide must first be fleshed, which is the process of removing flesh and film from the back of the hide. Next, the hide is stretched, and it is subjected to a dehydrating process involving air drying, salting, or pickling. This step is necessary since animal hides will begin to decompose rapidly after being removed from the animal.
Tanning

After arriving at a tannery, leather manufacturers soak hides in a mixture of lime and water to loosen hair and other undesired tissue. Next, a machine removes these substances. Leather manufacturers then wash the hides to remove any lime residue, and the hides are bated, which is a color-boosting process that removes non-fibrous protein. Once leather manufacturers have pickled the hides as a final softening process, they are ready to be tanned.
The word “tanning” comes from tannin (tannic acid), which refers to a type of chemical found in the roots, bark, seeds, and a variety of other parts of many different plant species. These days, however, most leather manufacturers use mineral tanning instead of vegetable tanning, which involves a specific type of chromium called chromium III sulfate.
Vegetable tanning can take weeks or months to complete, but mineral tanning usually only takes less than a single day. A variety of different tanning methods exist, but most involve soaking hides in a tanning solution.

Post-tanning processing

Once the tanning process is complete, hides are thoroughly dried, and they are dyed using one of a number of different dyeing methods. Next, leather manufacturers apply oils or greases to the surface of the hides to make the resulting leather softer and more water-resistant.
Leather manufacturers then dry the nearly-finished leather to around 15% moisture and subsequently raise or “recondition” the leather to around 20% moisture. After a final stretching, the finished leather is coated one last time to make it resistant to abrasion and the elements. The leather is now ready to be made into a wide array of different consumer goods.