What Is Milk Cotton Fabric?

Milk cotton is a type of fabric that is made with the casein powder found in milk. This type of fabric is also called milk fiber or casein fiber, and it has historically been mixed with a number of substances to provide them with a cotton-like texture and tensility.
These days, most casein fiber is mixed with acrylonitrile, which is the same substance that's used to make acrylic clothing. Therefore, milk cotton isn't a truly organic fiber, and it is generally considered to be synthetic or semi-synthetic.

Interestingly, a German fashion designer named Anke Domaske claims to have created a form of milk cotton made from only casein fiber, which means that the fabric she produces can be considered to be entirely organic. Domaske's company is called Qmilk, and she claims that she had the idea to develop a synthetic-free version of casein fabric after a family member became allergic to most types of clothing upon developing a certain type of cancer.
Intrigued by the potential of milk fiber but discouraged by the manufacturing process currently used to make this fabric, Domaske developed her own method of creating casein fabric without using any toxic chemicals. She claims to make all of her Qmilk garments from waste milk generated by German dairies that can't be consumed by humans.

At this point, the production of milk cotton worldwide is very minimal. While this fabric experienced its heyday in the early decades of the 20th century, it fell into obscurity as other synthetic or semi-synthetic fabrics became cheaper and more prevalent. While milk cotton made with acrylonitrile is unlikely to make any gains in popularity, it's possible that pure casein fabric will become more popular as time goes by due to its unique allergen profile and the environmentally sustainable production processes that are used to make this textile. Across the world, textile producers are focusing on the potential that protein-based fibers have to solve the environmental issues associated with producing cotton and other staple textile crops.
Consumers prize milk cotton for its softness and smoothness, and it is often used for apparel products that are worn close to the skin. However, it is relatively difficult to produce casein fiber, which means that most consumers are unlikely to have experienced the benefits of this fabric. Those who have worn milk cotton report that it has very pronounced moisture wicking abilities, and pure forms of casein fabric can be washed at high temperatures. Since they contain acrylic, however, semi-synthetic forms of this fabric can only be washed in cold or warm water.

How is Milk Cotton Made?
1. Obtaining Milk The milk used to make milk cotton is waste milk that is otherwise
unusable, which is generally obtained directly from a dairy.
2. Fermenting the Milk
It is then skimmed to remove fat and dewatered.
3. Extracting the Casein Protein The powdered milk is then dissolved and purified to remove
any substances that are not casein.
4. Immersing in Alkali
Powdered casein is immersed in alkali to make a solution
that is then passed through a spinneret.
5. Removing the Alkali The solution is then immersed in sulfuric acid to remove the
alkali.
6. Spinning into Yarn
The resulting fibers are stretched and spun into yarn.
7. Finishing They are tanned with aluminum salts and formaldehyde to
render them into usable textile yarn.

The process used to produce this type of fabric depends on the version of casein fiber that is being made. However, no matter which subtype of casein fabric is produced, the first step in making this textile is obtaining milk.
In most cases, the milk used to make milk cotton is waste milk that is otherwise unusable. This product is generally obtained directly from a dairy, and it is then skimmed to remove fat and dewatered. The end result is similar in appearance to milk-based protein powder, but to make fabric, the casein protein still needs to be extracted from this powdered substance.
The powdered milk is then dissolved and purified to remove any substances that are not casein. Past this point, however, the production process diverges based on the methods that are being used.

The original production process for casein fabric entails the immersion of powdered casein in alkali to make a solution that is then passed through a spinneret. After it has made its way through the spinneret, the solution is immersed in sulfuric acid to remove the alkali. The resulting fibers are then stretched and spun into yarn, and they are tanned with aluminum salts and formaldehyde to render them into usable textile yarn.
It's easy to see the problems with this production method. Formaldehyde is toxic, and a variety of other chemicals are also used in this process that may also be harmful to workers, the environment, or the end consumer.
The modern method of producing casein fiber involves chemically grafting pure casein to acrylonitrile in a process called graft copolymerization. This process doesn't entail the use of formaldehyde or any of the toxic chemicals that were used in the original casein fiber production method, but acrylonitrile is also a known toxin and carcinogen. While this modern method is more efficient and potentially safer, it still has its fair share of problems.
Recently, a variety of milk cotton producers have reported their newfound capacity to manufacture stable and tensile forms of this textile without mixing it with any synthetic materials. Ostensibly, this new production method is much more environmentally-friendly and results in a safer workplace, but there's just one catch: There's no detailed information available that explains the exact nature of the processes used to make this sustainable form of casein fabric.
For instance, the makers of Qmilk claim that their production process produces zero waste and that their fabrics are entirely biodegradable. However, they do not indicate which methods they use to avoid the necessity of including acrylonitrile or formaldehyde in the production process.
As casein fabric becomes more popular, it's likely that scholarly articles and other sources of information will appear with more details on how these new fully-organic versions of milk cotton are made. At this point, it's necessary to simply trust that manufacturers like Qmilk are living up to their promises.

