What Is Modal Fabric?

Modal fabric, which is also known as HWM rayon, is a type of rayon that is commonly used in consumer textiles. This fabric is considered to be semi-synthetic since it is made from a combination of organic and synthetic materials. The base material for modal rayon is cellulose from hardwood trees like birch and oak, but this raw tree material goes through a complex manufacturing process before it is rendered into a weavable fiber.
This version of rayon represents a significant evolution in the history of this fabric. The original forms of rayon that were developed toward the end of the 19th century were expensive to produce, and many of them were flammable. With the development of viscose rayon in the early 20th century, the majority of the cost and safety concerns regarding rayon were solved, but the process of making viscose rayon is unnecessarily complicated, and it produces a large amount of waste.

Modal rayon was first developed in 1951 in Japan, and in many ways, this type of rayon is nearly identical to viscose rayon. However, a simpler process is used to make modal rayon that doesn't produce as much waste, and many consumers note a significant difference in the feel of modal rayon as compared to viscose rayon.

For instance, modal rayon is generally perceived to be more lightweight than viscose rayon, and it is also more breathable, which has prompted this fabric's popularity in sportswear. This type of rayon is also a popular fabric for bed sheets due to its high moisture wicking profile. Modal rayon is available in thread counts as high as 300, which means that it can be considered a luxury bed sheet material. As compared to cotton, modal rayon is highly resistant to pilling, which is when individual textile fibers tangle and form knots that disfigure fabric and reduce its structural integrity.
Modal rayon's main competitor in the consumer marketplace is lyocell, which is a fully organic form of rayon. Due to the development of modal fabric, the production of viscose rayon around the world has all but stopped; this type of fabric is generally cheaper to produce than viscose, and the decreased number of steps that are required to produce it makes the environmental impact of this fabric less pronounced.
Consumers and textile manufacturers should be advised that modal rayon is not an inherently sustainable or environmentally-friendly material. While the manufacture of this product has the potential to be sustainable under certain circumstances, it is up individual manufacturers to follow the manufacturing processes that will result in environmentally-friendly fabrics.

How is Modal Fabric Made?
1. Harvesting of Trees The modal fabric production process begins with the
harvesting of trees to be rendered into cellulose.
2. Extracting the Cellulose
These trees are broken down into chips tare then purified to
extract their cellulose content.
3. Steeping the Sheets This extracted cellulose is formed into sheets, and these sheets are then steeped in vats of sodium hydroxide called
caustic soda.
4. Breaking into Crumbs The sheets are broken down into crumbs and immersed in
carbon disulfide to create sodium cellulose xanthate.
5. Creating Fibers This cellulose xanthate is then immersed in caustic soda once more to create a syrupy solution that is immediately forced
through a spinneret to create fibers.
6. Forming into Yarn These fibers are then immersed in sulfuric acid, stretched,
and formed into yarn. The resulting yarn is then washed,
bleached, rinsed, dried, and loaded onto spools.
7. Finishing The modal yarn is ready to be subjected to treatments that may
be applied before it is woven into a fabric.

The process of making modal fabric is highly similar to the process used to make viscose rayon. Essentially, modal fabric is an update of viscose rayon that eliminates some of the most wasteful or harmful aspects of the viscose production process. Most consumers and manufacturers also agree that modal rayon is a structurally superior product to viscose rayon.
The modal fabric production process begins with the harvesting of trees to be rendered into cellulose. These trees are broken down into chips that are approximately the size of postage stamps, and they are transferred to the manufacturing floor. These chips are then purified to extract their cellulose content, and the leftover tree products are discarded.
Next, this extracted cellulose is formed into sheets, and these sheets are then immersed or "steeped" in vats of sodium hydroxide, which is also called caustic soda. It's important to note that far lesser concentrations of sodium hydroxide are used to create modal rayon than are used to create viscose rayon, which results in the production of less toxic waste.

After steeping is complete, the sheets are broken down into crumbs. Unlike the case in the production of viscose rayon, these crumbs are not aged, and they are instead directly immersed in carbon disulfide, which transforms the white crumbs into an orange substance called sodium cellulose xanthate. It is at this point that the tree-derived cellulose can no longer be considered a purely organic substance.

This cellulose xanthate is then immersed in caustic soda once more to create a syrupy solution. The modal fabric production process again bypasses the aging process that usually occurs at this point, and this syrupy substance is immediately forced through a spinneret to create fibers.
These fibers are then immersed in sulfuric acid, stretched, and formed into yarn. The resulting yarn is then washed, bleached, rinsed, dried, and loaded onto spools. At this point, the modal yarn is ready to be subjected to pre-shrinking, fire resistance, wrinkle resistance, or a number of other treatments that may be applied before it is woven into a fabric.

