What Is Mohair Wool?

Mohair wool is a type of textile derived from the hair of the Angora goat. Unlike other goats, this type of goat is covered with shaggy hair. It is believed that the Angora goat developed this unique coat due to the environmental conditions where it evolved, and this type of goat is now prized for the silky and multipurpose wool that it produces.
It is believed that Angora goats evolved into their current form in Tibet, and they gradually migrated to Turkey. For centuries, these types of goats were only raised in Turkey , but records of mohair wool in England date back to the eighth century, which indicates that this type of fabric has been widely traded throughout Europe, Asia, and the Middle East for thousands of years.

Compared to sheep wool, mohair is much softer, and it also has a notable sheen and luster. These attributes have led some textile enthusiasts to dub mohair as the "diamond fiber," and this fabric is all the more popular due to its high compatibility with most types of dyes. Mohair is also much more elastic than most types of wool, it is not very flammable, and it is crease-resistant.
Because of the unique attributes of this type of wool, mohair is considered to be a luxury textile, and garments made entirely from this substance can be quite expensive. However, it's much more common to find mohair that has been mixed with other fabrics; even when this fiber is only used in small quantities, it makes any fabric of which it is a part much more elastic, shiny, and durable.
One of mohair's other notable qualities is this type of wool's resistance to felting. Most types of wool contain scales, and when these types of wool are washed at the wrong temperature, these scales fuse together to make an unsightly mess. The scales on mohair wool, however, are not fully developed, which means that garments made from this type of wool do not felt even if they are washed incorrectly.
As Angora goats age, the thickness of their hair fibers increases, and the wool of older Angora goats is not considered to be as desirable as the wool from younger goats. The younger an Angora goat is when it is sheared, the shinier and silkier the resulting wool will be.

On most Angora goat farms, shearing takes place twice a year in the spring and the fall. Each Angora goat produces about 15 pounds of mohair per year, and the shearing process is performed very carefully to ensure that no contaminants end up in the final product.
Mohair wool from Angora goats is not to be confused with Angora wool, which is actually derived from Angora rabbits. In addition, the term "mohair" is also sometimes used to describe a type of material that is used to make the roofs of convertible cars, but this fabric is actually a type of canvas, and it is not derived from Angora goats.

How is Mohair Wool Fabric
Made?
1. Shearing of an Angora Goat The shearing process is accomplished with large scissors, and the goats must be totally immobilized during the process to ensure that
they won't be hurt.
2. Washing
Once mohair is shorn from Angora goats, it is carefully
washed to remove any impurities.
3. Carding
Chunks of this wool are then made into strands.
4. Spinning These strands are then spun into yarn, and in most cases,
automated machines or treadle spinners are used to
make this twisted cord.
5. Finishing After a final washing process, the mohair yarn is ready to be
woven into clothing.

The production of mohair wool has evolved greatly over the years. It's likely that the nomadic peoples of Tibet made wool from these shaggy goats, and records indicate that this type of wool was made in Turkey thousands of years ago. When mohair became popular in England in the early 19th century, however, this fabric's production process became much more industrialized and widespread.
At the height of the British Empire, mohair was in such great demand that production of this type of wool spread to South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand. A small number of Angora goats were also sent to the United States, and this type of fabric is still produced in America to some degree.

The process of creating mohair begins with the shearing of an Angora goat. These goats grow hair rapidly, which means that they are ready for shearing twice per year. The shearing process is accomplished with large scissors, and the goats must be totally immobilized during the process to ensure that they won't be hurt.

Some animal rights organizations, such as PETA , have noted that the methods used during the shearing of Angora goats are inhumane. While practices among farms differ, the staff of some South African Angora farms have been caught treating their goats roughly and causing them serious physical harm. It is not necessary to subject Angora goats to this treatment to derive mohair wool, but some farms do so to save money.
Once mohair is shorn from Angora goats, it is carefully washed to remove any impurities. Since the hair from this type of goat is uniform in length, it is easy to card, which is the process by which chunks of this wool are made into strands. These strands are then spun into yarn, and in most cases, automated machines or treadle spinners are used to make this twisted cord.
After a final washing process, the mohair yarn is ready to be woven into clothing. In most cases, this yarn is sold to a textile manufacturer that will perform this final process, but some Angora goat farms produce their own finished textile products.