What Is Nylon Fabric?

Nylon is the name of a family of synthetic polymers that are commonly used to make a variety of different types of apparel and consumer goods. Unlike other organic or semi-synthetic fibers, nylon fibers are entirely synthetic, which means that they have no basis in organic material.
The use of this type of synthetic polymer in clothing began with a desire to find alternatives to silk and hemp for parachutes in World War II. At the time the war began, cotton was used for more than 80 percent of textile applications in the United States, and almost all other textiles were made from wool. By 1945, however, synthetic fibers like nylon constituted around 25 percent of the textile market share, and once the war ended, manufacturers sought new ways to market this new class of synthetic fabrics.

Directly after the war, there was a shortage of traditional dress materials like cotton and silk, so some individuals made dresses from repurposed nylon parachutes. Thus, the idea to use nylon in women's garments gained popularity, and the production of nylon stockings and lingerie rapidly picked up steam.

At the same time, nylon was finding ever greater popularity in a variety of other consumer and military markets. This substance had originally been developed by the DuPont Corporation in the early 1920s, and it's creation was officially announced at the 1939 World's Fair. At the time, DuPont had no intention of using nylon for scientific and industrial applications, and the main purpose of this new polymer was deemed to be for textiles.
At the time of its unveiling, nylon did not have its current name; upon recognizing this polymer's potential for use in fabrics, DuPont originally planned to market it under the name "no-run" due to its perceived ability to resist "runs" when used in fabric, which are forms of damage to tights that cause these garments to become aesthetically displeasing. However, it was soon discovered that nylon was, in fact, subject to runs, so the name was changed to "nuron." This name was also unsatisfactory, however, so it was changed to "nilon," and the "i" was replaced with a "y" to clarify pronunciation.
During the early days of nylon fabric, consumers noted a variety of issues with nylon fabric. Despite early marketing efforts that described nylon as "stronger than steel," nylon was found to be highly susceptible to runs and tears, and this fabric's lack of moisture-wicking properties also became a subject of concern. In extreme cases, nylon stockings would revert to coal and water.

Nylon would have been considered to be a failed experiment if producers of this material hadn't started mixing it with other textiles. It was found that when nylon fabric was mixed with polyester, spandex, or cotton, the desirable attributes of this fabric were retained, but many of the undesirable aspects of this fabric were eliminated. These days, most nylon garments consist of a blend of various fabrics.
This fabric remained popular throughout the 1940s and 1950s, but nylon and other synthetic textiles have experienced a steady drop in popularity since the 1970s. Over time, the novelty of nylon started to wear off, and consumers also became concerned about the environmental impact of this fabric. The main ingredient of nylon fabric is petroleum oil, and this textile is not biodegradable. As of 2008, however, around 12 percent of the world's synthetic fiber production consists of nylon fabric .
Even though nylon fabric for consumer garments has declined in popularity, this polymer family has become increasingly popular for industrial and scientific purposes. For instance, nylon can be made into a plastic that is highly durable and versatile, and nylon resins are commonly used in hair combs, machine screws, gun parts, food packaging, toothbrushes, and hundreds of other applications.

How is Nylon Fabric Made?
1. Extraction of Diamine Acid
A monomer, called diamine acid, is extracted from crude oil.
2. Combining
Diamine acid is forced to enter into a reaction with adipic acid
to create a polymer, known as nylon salt.
3. Heating This crystallized substance is then heated to form a molten
substance.
4. Extrusion
This substance is then extruded through a metal spinneret.
5. Loading
It is then loaded onto a type of spool called a bobbin.
6. Stretching
These fibers are then stretched to increase their
strength and elasticity.
7. Drawing They are then wound onto another spool in a process
called "drawing".
8. Spinning
The resulting fibers are ready to be spun into garments or other
forms of fibers.
9. Finishing It is then dyed to produce the color that is desired for the
end product.

Nylon fabric is a polymer, which means that it is composed of a long chain of carbon-based molecules called monomers. There are quite a few different types of nylon, but most of them are derived from polyamide monomers that are extracted from crude oil, which is also known as petroleum.

In most cases, a monomer called hexamethylenediamine is used in the production of nylon, and this substance is sometimes called diamine acid for short. This monomer is extracted from crude oil, and the remaining components of this oil are sometimes used for other purposes, but they may be discarded.
To make the polymer known as nylon, diamine acid is forced to enter into a reaction with adipic acid. This type of polymer is commonly known as PA 6,6, and it was the first type of polymer to be used for nylon fabric. PA 6,6 is a type of substance called a nylon salt, and this crystallized substance is then heated to form a molten substance.

This substance is then extruded through a spinneret, which is a device that looks similar to a showerhead that has dozens of tiny holes. Upon extrusion through the spinneret, nylon immediately hardens, and the resulting fibers are then ready to be loaded onto bobbins.
These fibers are then stretched to increase their strength and elasticity, and they are then wound onto another spool in a process called "drawing." This process causes the polymer molecules to arrange in a parallel structure, and after the drawing process is completed, the resulting fibers are ready to be spun into garments or other forms of fibers.
In some cases, nylon may be spun into fabrics on its own, but it is usually combined with other fabrics to create mixed textiles. It is then dyed to produce the color that is desired for the end product.