Ramie is otherwise known as China Grass, Grass Linen, Rhea & Grass Cloth.

A warm humid climate is essential for cultivating Ramie, (optimum growing temperature of 25-35°C.)

True Ramie or China grass has heart shaped leaves, the underside is white with small dense hairs which do not sting unlike the European stinging nettle. These hairs give the leaves a silvery appearance. 

The process of transforming Ramie fibres into textiles is a similar process of that from flax to linen. The Ramie fibre is very fine, like silk, and naturally white in colour. Ramie is often blended with other natural fibres, like cotton or viscose, this can resemble anything from fine linen to a more coarse scrim.

Properties of Ramie:

Ramie is a cellulose fibre.
One of the strongest natural fibres and it's even stronger when wet - eight times stronger than cotton!
Fibres are uneven, giving it a similar appearance to linen.
Known for it's ability to hold its shape and reduce wrinkling!
Low in elasticity and elongation potential meaning it does not easily shrink!
Naturally resistant to bacteria, pests, mildew and attacking insects.
Extremely absorbent making it comfortable to wear.
Easy to dye.
Naturally resistant to stains
Increased strength when wet
It can withstand high washing temperatures
Keeps its shape and doesn't shrink
It can be bleached
Sustainable fibre - shorter fibres and wasted fibres are used to manufacture paper!
Eight times stronger tensile strength than cotton and even silk!
Uses for Ramie:

Dressmaking - perfect for a number of garments due to its high strength and low degradability, more resistant to creases than linen, perfect for utility styles!
This Fabric is ideal for structured and semi structured styles like trousers!
Make our Cordelia Trousers - The Pattern Stash, wide legs are perfect for this cool feeling fabric and the pleated waistline and centre front will hold beautifully.
Pinefore dresses, tunics, linen tops, drapey dress styles all work lovely for this fabric!
More casual styles like dungarees will feel relaxed yet stylish, perfect for holiday season, check out our Lynsey Dungarees - The Pattern Stash!
Structured styles like blazers and waistcoats will keep you smart but cool, try our Jemima Waistcoat - The Pattern Stash.
Team with our indulgent luxurious Jewel Jacquard linings for s a special finish.
Perfect for garments & projects that are often washed such as: laundry bags, toiletry bags, aprons, household furnishings like cushions & curtains!

