What is soy fabric?

With the softness of silk, soy fabric or “vegetable cashmere” is one of the world’s most eco-friendly fabrics. Produced using soy protein derived from the hulls of soybeans, this intriguing textile takes a waste product and transforms it into a usable textile with minimal use of toxic chemicals and limited processing.
Soy fabric has excellent drape, and it is highly elastic. While this textile dyes well, colors sometimes bleed during the first few washings. Though reasonably prone to pilling, soy fabric does not wrinkle, and it doesn’t shrink.

Soy fabric also has unique properties due to its chemical composition. For instance, this textile is UV-resistant, and it is also highly antimicrobial. Due to its light-reflective qualities, soy fabric looks like silk in addition to being very soft and lightweight.

History of soy fabric

Despite never achieving a significant level of popularity, soy fabric has a remarkably storied past. The great Henry Ford of Ford Motors fame is credited with inventing soy fabric, and he was known to wear soy garments toward the end of his life as part of his efforts to popularize soybean production in the United States. In 1941, for instance, he modeled a soy necktie in pictures taken on his 78th birthday, and he was also pictured wearing a suit composed of a mixture of “soy wool” and sheep wool fabrics.
Ford’s obsession with soy drove him as far as to produce a soybean car, and he also made an effort to incorporate soy fabric into his mass-production vehicles as frequently as possible. Starting in 1940, Ford initiated plans to produce a combined soy fabric and wool material for use in the upholstery for his automobiles. Due to the intervention of World War II, this project proved to be short-lived, but many Ford vehicles produced between 1941 and 1945 featured soy fabric sidewall upholstery.
During the war, Ford and other automotive companies started using new man-made fabrics like nylon for interior upholstery, and Henry Ford’s fixation with soybeans largely died with him in 1947. It would be more than 50 years before fabric pioneers once again took up the torch of soy fabric production.
In 1999, textile engineers announced the development of a new process that made the production of soy fabric considerably more efficient and less expensive. By 2003, this new production method had achieved a significant degree of popularity worldwide, and public approval of soy fabric improved substantially as consumer concerns over the environmental impact of common textile fibers reached a fever pitch.

Soy fabric today

Despite its impressive ecological sustainability and other desirable attributes, soy fabric has failed to achieve any significant degree of popularity. Within niche fabric production circles, however, soy protein fiber remains a textile fiber of choice, and many consumers will go considerably out of their way to purchase apparel and other items composed of soy fabric.
To this day, soy fabric remains the only textile composed of pure plant protein, and it’s also the only textile produced using food industry byproducts. Over time, it’s likely that a greater number of consumers will become aware of the unique benefits and attributes of soy fabric, driving this textile’s popularity higher.

How Is Soy Fabric Made?
1. Isolation of soy protein Firstly, manufacturers use natural processes to separate the protein present in soybean hulls from other
compounds.
2. Breakdown of proteins Next, the soybean protein slurry is exposed to treatments that reduce its coarseness, with alkali
often being used to achieve this effect.
3. Extrusion Then, manufacturers extrude the resulting slurry through spinnerets. Once cool and dry, the fibers are
stable and ready for production.
4. Post-treatment Following this, chemicals such as Formaldehyde or polycarboxylic acid may be used to treat the fabric
to increase its durability.
5. Spinning
After, manufacturers spin their soy fibers into yarn.
They then dye the finished yarn without using bleach.
6. Weaving Finally, the spun yarn is woven into long strips of
fabric.

Soy fabric is derived from protein found in the hulls of soybeans. The processes used to produce soy fabric fibers vary significantly from manufacturer to manufacturer, and the best processes significantly limit or reuse the chemicals necessary to render soy protein into a usable textile fiber. Here’s a summation of the steps textile manufacturers take to produce soy fabric:

1. Isolation of soy protein

Soy fabric manufacturers use natural processes to separate the protein present in soybean hulls from other compounds. It’s also possible to extract protein directly from soybeans, but this practice is less popular. Soybean hulls are essentially valueless waste, but soybeans themselves have considerable market value, and hulls provide similar amounts of protein while being inedible.

2. Breakdown of proteins using heat, alkali, or enzymes

Soybean protein is not suitable for textile fiber manufacture in its natural state. To make soybean protein slurry suitable for textile production, it must first be exposed to treatments that reduce its coarseness.
In many cases, textile manufacturers use alkali to achieve this effect. While industrial alkali liquids can be reused, they cause toxicity issues if they enter the biosphere. Alternatively, textile manufacturers can use natural enzymes to render soy protein into a desirable state for fiber processing, which do not harm the environment. Most alkali and enzyme soy protein treatments also involve heat application.
3. Extrusion through spinnerets

After textile manufacturers have rendered soy protein into a desirable state, they extrude the resulting slurry through spinnerets. Once cool and dry, the resulting fibers are stable and ready for textile production. To improve the durability of the finished fibers, however, some textile manufacturers expose their soy fibers to formaldehyde treatments.
4. Post-treatment

Formaldehyde is a known carcinogen, which has led certain soy fabric producers to use polycarboxylic acids instead. Other soy fabric manufacturers choose to avoid exposing their fibers to finishing treatments altogether, but the resulting yarn is less durable and more prone to creasing.
5. Spinning

Next, soy fabric manufacturers spin their soy fibers into yarn. They then dye the finished yarn without using bleach since soy fibers are relatively delicate.
6. Weaving

The spun yarn can now be woven into long strips of fabric. Rolled onto bolts, this fabric is then sent to apparel or homeware manufacturers for the production of consumer products.

