What Is Suede Fabric?

Suede is a type of leather, and it can be derived from any type of animal skin that is used in the production of normal leather. The main difference between suede and other types of leather is that suede fabric is derived from the underside of animal skin while most types of leather are derived from the top side of animal skin.
The underside of animal skin is much softer than the outside, but it is also less resistant to the elements and stains. Therefore, suede is usually treated as a luxury material; while it lacks the durability of normal leather, it is much softer to the touch and more comfortable when worn against the skin.

Compared to normal leather, suede is far more permeable, which means it lacks the waterproofing benefits of leather. It is, therefore, best to wear suede garments indoors or in situations in which encountering adverse environmental conditions is unlikely.
While most kinds of leather are produced from cow skin, suede is most commonly produced from lamb skin. Other types of animal skin, however, such as calf, goat, and deer can also be used in suede production.
In an attempt to reduce the impact on leather-producing animals and counter some of the negative attributes of suede, textile manufacturers have attempted to create a variety of different synthetic suede alternatives to varying degrees of success. While it’s impossible to truly replicate the desirable attributes of suede, synthetic alternatives may be less expensive or more durable than the genuine article.

History of Suede

Etymologically, the term “suede” comes from the French term “gants de Suede,” which literally translates to “gloves of Sweden.” During the Romantic period in France, imports of Swedish leather became highly popular among the nobility. Instead of using the rough outer hide of animals, Swedish leather artisans had devised a way to use the soft inner skin of animals to devise incredibly soft gloves for women.
While suede production remained limited to gloves for a number of decades, artisans in Sweden and throughout Europe eventually recognized that the potential of suede reached far beyond mere glove production. Over time, suede production expanded into jackets, shoes, bags, and the other applications of suede we know of today.
Suede production is a relatively recent phenomenon in human history, but human beings have been using animal hides to make clothing and accessories for thousands of years. Evidence from prehistoric times indicates that Neolithic peoples used animal hides as their primary source of textiles, and the use of hides and leather in fabric production continues unabated to this day. The major difference between today’s leather and its prehistoric counterparts is the variety of leather products available and the technical skill employed to develop modern leather materials.

Attributes of Suede

Suede has a fuzzy finish, which is sometimes referred to as “napped.” While most types of leather are smooth, suede feels more like cotton or another type of plant-based fabric than animal skin. In appearance, suede is matte while normal leather is glossy, and while normal leather is waterproof, suede is highly permeable, and it tends to stain.
Unlike normal leather, which is usually quite thick, suede is usually thin, which contributes to its allure for delicate textile applications. Suede is notoriously hard to clean; machine washing this fabric can ruin it, but since suede becomes dirty so easily, owners of suede garments, shoes, or accessories must professionally clean their suede items relatively frequently to keep them in good condition.

How Is Suede Fabric Made?
1. Slaughtering of the Animal The process of making suede begins with the slaughtering of the animal that will be used to make this
fabric. Next, the animal is skinned, and the hide is dried.
2. Removing the Hair Follicles Once the hide is fully dried, a natural chemical
called lime is used to remove all the hair follicles
from the hide.
3. Transforming Into Leather Next, the hide is exposed to natural enzymes called tannins, which render the hide inert and officially
transform it into leather.
4. Treating the Leather Leather makers apply a mixture of salts, oils, and
other natural compounds to treat the leather.
5. Thinning The leather will be thinned and split, which results in the nappy exterior texture that makes suede so
desirable.
6. Texturing Lastly, a special texturing process will be
employed to make the resulting suede soft and
comfortable.
7. Dyeing Some manufacturers may choose to dye their suede before selling it to accessory or garment
manufacturers.
8. Sewing Once the dyeing process is complete, suede can then
be cut and sewn to form a final product that can be
sold to the end consumer.

The process of making suede begins with the slaughtering of the animal that will be used to make this fabric. Next, the animal is skinned, and the hide is dried.
Once the hide is fully dried, a natural chemical called lime is used to remove all the hair follicles from the hide. Next, the hide is exposed to natural enzymes called tannins, which render the hide inert and officially transform it into leather.
Without tannins, hide used to make leather would remain like any other animal product and decompose over time. Tannins prevent this decomposition, and the process of applying tannin is called “tanning.”

Finishing the Leather

At this point, the leather that will be used to make suede is in a more-or-less finished state. To make a fabric recognizable as suede, however, a few more processes must be undertaken.
First, leather makers apply a mixture of salts, oils, and other natural compounds to treat the leather. This process makes leather more durable, and some leather manufacturers may use synthetic chemicals to provide even more durability.
To turn this finished leather product into suede, the leather will be thinned and split, which results in the nappy exterior texture that makes suede so desirable. Lastly, a special texturing process will be employed to make the resulting suede soft and comfortable.
Final Processes
With the final texturing process, suede fabric is ready to be made into garments, accessories, or shoes. Some manufacturers, however, may choose to dye their suede before selling it to accessory or garment manufacturers.
Unlike normal leather, which is notoriously difficult to dye, the unique texture of suede bonds well to a variety of natural and artificial dyes. Once the dyeing process is complete, suede is generally sold by the yard, and it can then be cut and sewn to form a final product that can be sold to the end consumer. Some apparel and shoe manufacturers may, however, choose to apply a final waterproofing finish before they sell their suede items.
